1. Sci Rep. 2020 Nov 13;10(1):19818. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76715-w.

Cell-free synthesis of the hirudin variant 1 of the blood-sucking leech Hirudo 
medicinalis.

Wüstenhagen DA(1), Lukas P(2), Müller C(2), Aubele SA(1), Hildebrandt JP(2), 
Kubick S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology (IZI), Branch 
Bioanalytics and Bioprocesses Potsdam-Golm (IZI-BB), 14476, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Animal Physiology and Biochemistry, Zoological Institute and Museum, 
University of Greifswald, 17489, Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology (IZI), Branch 
Bioanalytics and Bioprocesses Potsdam-Golm (IZI-BB), 14476, Potsdam, Germany. 
Stefan.kubick@izi-bb.fraunhofer.de.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, Joint Faculty of the Brandenburg University of 
Technology Cottbus - Senftenberg, The Brandenburg Medical School Theodor Fontane 
and the University of Potsdam, 16816, Neuruppin, Germany. 
Stefan.kubick@izi-bb.fraunhofer.de.

Synthesis and purification of peptide drugs for medical applications is a 
challenging task. The leech-derived factor hirudin is in clinical use as an 
alternative to heparin in anticoagulatory therapies. So far, recombinant hirudin 
is mainly produced in bacterial or yeast expression systems. We describe the 
successful development and application of an alternative protocol for the 
synthesis of active hirudin based on a cell-free protein synthesis approach. 
Three different cell lysates were compared, and the effects of two different 
signal peptide sequences on the synthesis of mature hirudin were determined. The 
combination of K562 cell lysates and the endogenous wild-type signal peptide 
sequence was most effective. Cell-free synthesized hirudin showed a considerably 
higher anti-thrombin activity compared to recombinant hirudin produced in 
bacterial cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-76715-w
PMCID: PMC7666225
PMID: 33188246

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


2. Circulation. 2001 Mar 13;103(10):1479-84. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.10.1479.

Recombinant hirudin in clinical practice: focus on lepirudin.

Greinacher A(1), Lubenow N.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, 
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

Clinical applications for recombinant hirudins have been investigated for the 
past 10 years. The first indication for which a hirudin-lepirudin-has been 
approved is treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Also, the 
recently completed trials for use of lepirudin in unstable angina indicate a 
potentially new indication. This review describes pharmacology and clinical 
applications of lepirudin with an emphasis on HIT and unstable angina. An 
overview of usage of lepirudin in acute coronary syndromes is given, as well as 
a summary of rare indications for lepirudin, such as extracorporeal circulation, 
for which comprehensive data are lacking.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.103.10.1479
PMID: 11245656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Int J Hematol. 2017 Oct;106(4):476-483. doi: 10.1007/s12185-017-2271-8. Epub 
2017 Jun 9.

Comparisons of argatroban to lepirudin and bivalirudin in the treatment of 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Sun Z(1), Lan X(2), Li S(2), Zhao H(2), Tang Z(3), Xi Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Dalian Municipal Central Hospital, Xinan Road No. 
826, Shahekou District, Dalian, 116033, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Dalian Municipal Central Hospital, Dalian, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Dalian Municipal Central Hospital, Xinan Road No. 
826, Shahekou District, Dalian, 116033, China. yalinxi@hotmail.com.

To prevent thromboembolic events associated with heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia (HIT), patients usually are treated with argatroban, lepirudin, 
and bivalirudin. Here, we conducted a meta-analysis of studies to comparing the 
treatment of HIT with the following direct thrombin inhibitor: argatroban versus 
lepirudin and argatroban versus bivalirudin. We systematically searched PubMed, 
Embase, and Cochrane Library database for relevant studies. The clinical 
outcomes were thromboembolic complication and bleeding. A total of 589 articles 
were found and 9 of which were finally included in this meta-analysis. There 
were no significantly differences of thromboembolic complication between 
argatroban and hirudin analogues (lepirudin and bivalirudin) in the treatment of 
HIT (lepirudin: RR = 0.773, 95% CI = 0.449-1.331, P = 0.353; bivalirudin: 
RR = 0.768, 95% CI = 0.386-1.527, P = 0.452). Moreover, the incidence of 
clinical bleeding of argatroban was similar to hirudin analogues (lepirudin: 
RR = 0.755, 95% CI = 0.531-1.073, P = 0.117; bivalirudin: RR = 0.995, 95% 
CI = 0.673-1.472, P = 0.981). Current evidences show that argatroban has the 
similar effectiveness and safety with lepirudin and bivalirudin for defending 
against HIT.

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-017-2271-8
PMID: 28600720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Pharmacotherapy. 2002 Apr;22(4):492-9. doi: 10.1592/phco.22.7.492.33671.

Removal of lepirudin, a recombinant hirudin, by hemodialysis, hemofiltration, or 
plasmapheresis.

Willey ML(1), de Denus S, Spinler SA.

Author information:
(1)Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA.

Lepirudin (recombinant hirudin), a direct thrombin inhibitor, is an effective 
alternative method of anticoagulation in patients with heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia. However, because it is eliminated by the kidneys, the 
half-life of lepirudin may be substantially prolonged in patients with renal 
failure. Patients undergoing hemodialysis must be closely monitored, and therapy 
must be individualized based on each patient's ability to clear the drug. 
Current literature on the removal of lepirudin by dialysis or plasmapheresis is 
limited, but available data suggest that lepirudin can be removed with these 
methods. The ability of filtration systems to remove lepirudin from the blood is 
highly dependent on the membrane material used in the system. Understanding the 
effects of hemodialysis, hemofiltration, and plasmapheresis on lepirudin levels 
is important, especially since no antidote is available to treat elevated serum 
lepirudin concentrations.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.22.7.492.33671
PMID: 11939684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Circulation. 1999 Jan 5-12;99(1):73-80. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.1.73.

Recombinant hirudin (lepirudin) provides safe and effective anticoagulation in 
patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a prospective study.

Greinacher A(1), Völpel H, Janssens U, Hach-Wunderle V, Kemkes-Matthes B, 
Eichler P, Mueller-Velten HG, Pötzsch B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, 
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University, Greifswald, Germany. 
greinach@rz.uni-greifswald.de

BACKGROUND: The immunological type of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is 
the most frequent drug-induced thrombocytopenia. This study evaluated the 
efficacy of recombinant hirudin (r-hirudin or lepirudin), a potent thrombin 
inhibitor, for anticoagulation in patients with confirmed HIT.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eighty-two patients in this prospective, multicenter study 
received 1 of 4 intravenous r-hirudin regimens: A1, HIT patients with thrombosis 
(n=51), 0.4-mg/kg bolus and then 0.15 mg. kg-1. h-1; A2, HIT patients with 
thrombosis receiving thrombolysis (n=5), 0. 2-mg/kg bolus and then 0.1 mg. kg-1. 
h-1; B, HIT patients without thrombosis (n=18), 0.1 mg. kg-1. h-1; and C, during 
cardiopulmonary bypass surgery (n=8), 0.25-mg/kg bolus and then 5-mg boluses as 
needed. Response criteria were increase in platelet count by >/=30% to >10(9)/L 
and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) values 1.5 to 3.0 times 
baseline values achieved with a maximum of 2 dose increases. No placebo control 
was used for ethical reasons. Outcomes of a subset of r-hirudin-treated patients 
who met predefined inclusion criteria (n=71) were compared with those of a 
historical control group (n=120) for combined and individual incidences of 
death, amputations, new thromboembolic complications, and incidences of 
bleeding. Platelet counts increased rapidly in 88.7% of r-hirudin-treated 
patients with acute HIT. In regimens A1 and A2, the 25% and 75% quartiles of the 
aPTT were within the target range at all but 1 time point. The incidence of the 
combined end point (death, amputation, new thromboembolic complications) was 
significantly reduced in r-hirudin patients compared with historical control 
patients (P=0.014). During first selected treatment, the adjusted hazard ratio 
for r-hirudin patients versus historical control was 0.279 (95% CI, 0.112 to 
0.699; P=0.003). Bleeding rates were similar in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: r-Hirudin treatment is associated with a rapid and sustained 
recovery of platelet counts, sufficient aPTT prolongations, and true clinical 
benefits for patients with HIT.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.99.1.73
PMID: 9884382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Circulation. 1999 Aug 10;100(6):587-93. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.100.6.587.

Lepirudin (recombinant hirudin) for parenteral anticoagulation in patients with 
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Heparin-Associated Thrombocytopenia Study 
(HAT) investigators.

Greinacher A(1), Janssens U, Berg G, Böck M, Kwasny H, Kemkes-Matthes B, Eichler 
P, Völpel H, Pötzsch B, Luz M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt 
University, Greifswald, Germany. greinach@mail.uni-greifswald.de

BACKGROUND: We prospectively investigated lepirudin for further parenteral 
anticoagulation in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients with confirmed HIT (n=112) received lepirudin 
according to need for 2 to 10 days (longer if necessary): A1, treatment: 0.4 
mg/kg IV bolus, followed by 0.15 mg. kg(-1). h(-1) intravenous infusion, n=65; 
A2, treatment in conjunction with thrombolysis: 0.2 mg/kg, followed by 0.10 mg. 
kg(-1). h(-1), n=4; and B, prophylaxis: 0.10 mg. kg(-1). h(-1), n=43. Outcomes 
from 95 eligible lepirudin-treated patients were compared with those of 
historical control patients (n=120). Complete laboratory response (activated 
partial thromboplastin time ratio >1.5 with </=2 dose increases and platelet 
count normalization by day 10) was achieved in 65 lepirudin-treated patients 
(69.1%; 95% CI, 59. 3% to 78.3%). At 2 weeks after cessation of lepirudin, 11 
patients died (9.8%), 10 underwent limb amputation (8.9%), and 20 suffered a new 
thromboembolic complication (17.9%). The average combined event rate per 
patient-day decreased from 5.1% in the pretreatment period to 1.5% in the 
treatment period. Thirty-five days after HIT confirmation, fewer 
lepirudin-treated patients than historical control patients had experienced >/=1 
outcome (cumulative incidence 30.9% versus 52.1%; relative risk [RR] 0.71; 
P=0.12, log-rank test). Bleeding events were more frequent in the lepirudin 
group than the historical control group (cumulative incidence at 35 days, 44.6% 
versus 27.2%; RR 2.57; P=0.0001, log-rank test). No difference was observed in 
bleeding events requiring transfusion (cumulative incidence at 35 days, 12.9% 
versus 9.1%; RR 1.66; P=0.23, log-rank test); no intracranial bleeding was 
observed in the lepirudin group.
CONCLUSIONS: Lepirudin effectively prevents death, limb amputations, and new 
thromboembolic complications and has an acceptable safety profile in HIT 
patients. Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible if HIT is suspected.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.100.6.587
PMID: 10441094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Lepirudin.

Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National 
Library of Medicine (US); 2006–.
2020 Nov 16.

Lepirudin is no longer marketed in the United States. Limited information 
indicates that lepirudin in doses up to 100 mg daily produce very low levels in 
milk. Because of its large molecular weight, it would not be expected to be 
absorbed from breastmilk by the infant. Lepirudin would not be expected to cause 
any adverse effects in breastfed infants, especially if the infant is older than 
2 months.[1]

PMID: 30000058


8. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Jan;53(1):41-8. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9511-1.

Production and characterization of hirudin variant-1 by SUMO fusion technology 
in E. coli.

Lu W(1), Cai X, Gu Z, Huang Y, Xia B, Cao P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu Province Institute of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, 100#, Shizi Street, Hongshang Road, Nanjing, 
210028 Jiangsu, China.

Hirudin is the most potent non-covalent inhibitor of thrombin. Several 
expression systems have been used to produce recombinant hirudin for 
pharmaceutical purposes. However, high expression of active hirudin in 
Escherichia coli cytoplasm has not been successful owing to the fact that 
heterogenetic small peptide is easily degraded in the cell. To solve this 
problem, we constructed a recombinant form of the hirudin variant-1 (HV1) as a 
fusion protein with the small ubiquitin-related modifier gene (SUMO) by use of 
over-lap PCR. The fusion gene His(6)-SUMO-HV1 was highly expressed in E. coli 
BL21 (DE3) in which the SUMO-HV1 accounts for over 30% of the soluble fraction. 
The fusion protein was purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and cleaved by 
a SUMO-specific protease Ulp1 to release the HV1 with natural N-terminal. The 
recombinant HV1 (rHV1) was further purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography 
and then by Q anion-exchange chromatography. N-terminal sequencing result 
demonstrated the purified rHV1 had the same N-terminal sequence as the native 
hirudin. MALDI-TOF/MS analysis indicated that the molecular weight of the 
purified rHV1 protein was 6939.161 Da, which was similar to the theoretical 
molecular weight of rHV1 6,944 Da. The Chromozym TH assay result showed that the 
anti-thrombin activity of purified rHV1 was 8,800 ATU/mg and comparable to the 
specific activity of native hirudin.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-012-9511-1
PMID: 22371262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Lancet. 1999 Feb 6;353(9151):429-38.

Effects of recombinant hirudin (lepirudin) compared with heparin on death, 
myocardial infarction, refractory angina, and revascularisation procedures in 
patients with acute myocardial ischaemia without ST elevation: a randomised 
trial. Organisation to Assess Strategies for Ischemic Syndromes (OASIS-2) 
Investigators.

[No authors listed]

Comment in
    Lancet. 1999 Feb 6;353(9151):423-4.

BACKGROUND: Despite the use of heparin and aspirin, 5-10% of patients with 
unstable angina develop myocardial infarction or refractory angina in hospital. 
We tested the hypothesis that recombinant hirudin (lepirudin), a direct thrombin 
inhibitor, would be superior to heparin, an indirect thrombin inhibitor, in 
patients with acute ischaemic syndromes who were receiving aspirin.
METHODS: 10,141 patients with unstable angina or suspected acute myocardial 
infarction without ST elevation were randomly assigned heparin (5000 units bolus 
then 15 units kg(-1) h(-1); n=5058) or hirudin (0.4 mg/kg bolus then 0.15 mg 
kg(-1) h(-1) infusion; n=5083) for 72 h in a double-blind trial. The primary 
outcome measure was cardiovascular death or new myocardial infarction at 7 days. 
Analysis was by intention to treat.
FINDINGS: At 7 days, 213 (4.2%) patients in the heparin group and 182 (3.6%) in 
the hirudin group had experienced cardiovascular death or new myocardial 
infarction (relative risk 0.84 [95% CI 0.69-1.02]; p=0.077). The numbers with 
cardiovascular death, new myocardial infarction, or refractory angina at 7 days 
were 340 (6.7%) with heparin and 284 (5.6%) with hirudin (0.82 [0.70-0.96]; 
p=0.0125). These differences were primarily observed during the 72 h treatment 
period (cardiovascular death or myocardial infarction relative risk 0.76 
[0.59-0.99], p=0.039: cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or refractory 
angina 0.78 [0.63-0.96], p=0.019). Although there was an excess of major 
bleeding requiring transfusion with hirudin (59 [1.2%] vs 34 [0.7%] with 
heparin; p=0.01), there was no excess in life-threatening episodes (20 in each 
group) or strokes (14 in each group).
INTERPRETATION: The data from OASIS-2 suggest that recombinant hirudin is 
superior to heparin in preventing cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, 
and refractory angina with an acceptable safety profile in patients with 
unstable angina or acute myocardial infarction without ST elevation. Thus, a 
direct thrombin inhibitor is more effective than an indirect thrombin inhibitor.

PMID: 9989712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(20):3388-416. doi: 10.2174/092986712801215847.

Emerging anticoagulants.

Kennedy B(1), Gargoum FS, Kennedy L, Khan F, Curran DR, O'Connor TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Mercy University Hospital, Grenville 
Place, Cork, Ireland.

Warfarin, heparin and their derivatives have been the traditional anticoagulants 
used for prophylaxis and treatment of venous thromboembolism. While the modern 
clinician is familiar with the efficacy and pharmacokinetics of these agents, 
their adverse effects have provided the impetus for the development of newer 
anticoagulants with improved safety, ease of administration, more predictable 
pharmacodynamics and comparable efficacy. Research into haemostasis and the 
coagulation cascade has made the development of these newer anticoagulants 
possible. These drugs include the factor Xa inhibitors and IIa (thrombin) 
inhibitors. Direct and indirect factor Xa inhibitors are being developed with a 
relative rapid onset of action and stable pharmacokinetic profiles negating the 
need for close monitoring; this potentially makes them a more attractive option 
than heparin or warfarin. Examples of direct factor Xa inhibitors include 
apixaban, rivaroxaban, otamixaban, betrixaban and edoxaban. Examples of indirect 
factor Xa inhibitors include fondaparinux, idraparinux and idrabiotaparinux. 
Direct thrombin inhibitors (factor IIa inhibitors) were developed with the 
limitations of standard heparin and warfarin in mind. Examples include 
recombinant hirudin (lepirudin), bivalirudin, ximelagatran, argatroban, and 
dabigatran etexilate. This review will discuss emerging novel anticoagulants and 
their use for the prophylaxis and management of venous thromboembolism, for 
stroke prevention in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation and for coronary artery 
disease.

DOI: 10.2174/092986712801215847
PMID: 22680641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]