1. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1173-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102691. Epub 2012 
Jun 22.

The IL-2 diphtheria toxin fusion protein denileukin diftitox modulates the onset 
of diabetes in female nonobese diabetic animals in a time-dependent manner and 
breaks tolerance in male nonobese diabetic animals.

Zinser E(1), Rössner S, Littmann L, Pangratz N, Schuler G, Steinkasserer A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immune Modulation at the Department of Dermatology, University 
Hospital Erlangen, D-91052 Erlangen, Germany. elisabeth.zinser@uk-erlangen.de

Denileukin diftitox, also known as DAB(389)IL-2 or Ontak, is a fusion protein 
toxin consisting of the full-length sequence of the IL-2 protein and as 
toxophore the truncated diphtheria toxin. As a consequence, it delivers the 
toxic agent to CD25-bearing cells, whereby CD25 represents the high-affinity 
α-subunit of the IL-2 receptor. Initially it was developed for the treatment of 
patients with cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Meanwhile, denileukin diftitox is also 
used as an adjuvant in other tumor therapies and neoplastic disorders. In this 
study, to our knowledge we report for the first time that denileukin diftitox 
has also dramatic effects regarding the pathology of type 1 diabetes using the 
NOD mouse model. Repeated injections of denileukin diftitox into female NOD mice 
at 12 wk of age led to a clear acceleration of disease onset, whereas injection 
at 7 wk of age did not. Using male NOD mice, which are much less susceptible to 
diabetes, we demonstrate that the injection of denileukin diftitox leads to a 
dramatic development of type 1 diabetes within days after injection, thereby 
obviously breaking pre-existing tolerance mechanisms. This is accompanied by an 
increased IFN-γ production of autoreactive splenic cells and a decreased 
presence of regulatory CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T cells. In contrast, transfer of 
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T cells could correct the defect after denileukin diftitox 
treatment. Furthermore, whereas IFN-γ production was increased in the pancreata 
of treated animals, insulin expression was strongly reduced. These finding 
should be considered when denileukin diftitox is used for the treatment of 
patients suffering from tumors and/or autoimmune disorders.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102691
PMID: 22730534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Clin Lymphoma. 2000 Nov;1 Suppl 1:S27-31.

DAB(389)IL-2 (denileukin diftitox, ONTAK): a new fusion protein technology.

Foss FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Tufts New England Medical Center, Boston, 
MA 02111-1533, USA. francine.foss@es.nemc.org

Genetic engineering has led to the development of fusion protein toxins, which 
are targeted effector molecules that combine a targeting ligand such as a growth 
factor with a cytocidal moiety such as a plant or bacterial toxin. The first 
genetically constructed family of fusion proteins used diphtheria toxin as the 
toxophore for receptor-binding domain substitution. Diphtheria toxin consists of 
three domains: an enzymatically active adenosine diphosphate (ADP) 
ribosyltransferase domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and a C-terminal 
receptor-binding domain. Introduction of the enzymatically active domain into 
the cytosol via receptor-mediated endocytosis results in inhibition of protein 
synthesis by ADP ribosylation of elongation-factor 2. DAB(486)IL-2, in which the 
native receptor-binding domain of diphtheria toxin was replaced with the 
full-length interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene, was capable of intoxicating high-affinity 
IL-2 receptor-bearing cells in vitro with an IC(50) of 10(-10) M; whereas, cells 
lacking the full component of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor (p55, p75, p64) 
were relatively resistant (IC(50) of 10(-8) M). Because of a short in vivo 
half-life of DAB(486)IL-2, efforts to reengineer the molecule were undertaken, 
leading to the DAB(389)IL-2 construct, which had a twofold to threefold higher 
Kd than DAB(486)IL-2 and a longer half-life, resulting in a tenfold increase in 
potency. Thus far, the clinical activity of both IL-2 chimeric fusion toxins has 
been similar, with the DAB(389)IL-2 molecule displaying more favorable 
pharmacokinetics.

PMID: 11707860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Denileukin Diftitox.

LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury 
[Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases; 2012–.
2017 Dec 27.

Denileukin diftitox is a recombinant fusion protein of human interleukin-2 
(IL-2) attached to diphtheria toxin fragments A and B that is used as an 
antineoplastic agent to treat cutaneous T cell lymphomas that express IL-2 
receptors. High doses of denileukin diftitox can cause mild-to-moderate 
elevations in serum enzymes and bilirubin, but rarely result in clinically 
significant acute liver injury.

PMID: 31643755


4. Cancer. 2006 May 15;106(10):2158-64. doi: 10.1002/cncr.21851.

Phase II clinical studies of denileukin diftitox diphtheria toxin fusion protein 
in patients with previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Frankel AE(1), Surendranathan A, Black JH, White A, Ganjoo K, Cripe LD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Scott and White Hospital, Temple, Texas 76508, USA. 
afrankel@swmail.sw.org

BACKGROUND: The safety and efficacy of the interleukin-2 diphtheria toxin fusion 
protein (DAB(389)IL2; denileukin diftitox) directed against the IL-2 receptor 
(IL-2R) was tested in patients with recurrent or refractory chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia (CLL).
METHODS: Denileukin diftitox was administered as 60-minute intravenous infusions 
for 5 days every 21 days at a dose of 18 mug/kg per day for up to 8 cycles. In 
total, 28 patients were treated in 2 multiinstitutional studies with similar 
eligibility criteria and treatment protocols. Twenty-two patients receive > or = 
2 cycles of denileukin diftitox and were evaluable for response.
RESULTS: Twelve of 22 patients achieved reductions of peripheral CLL cells, with 
5 of 12 patients achieving >80% reductions. Six of 22 patients achieved 
reductions in the size of lymph node on examination and computed tomography 
scans, and all 6 of those patients met the criteria for a partial or complete 
response that lasted > or = 2 months. Bone marrow biopsies before and after 
treatment confirmed a complete remission that lasted for 1 year in 1 patient. 
Overall, denileukin diftitox produced complete remission in 1 of 22 patients 
(4%) and partial remission in 5 of 22 patients (23%) for a total remission rate 
of 27%. Progression-free intervals in the responders were 2 months in 2 patients 
and 4 months, 6 months, 7 months, and 12 months in 1 patient each. Toxicities 
were moderate. No infections associated with immunosuppression were seen. There 
was no significant correlation of response or toxicities with the numbers of 
denileukin diftitox cycles received or with CD25 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Follow-up studies will be required to identify predictors of 
response that may improve the response rate to denileukin diftitox in patients 
with CLL.

Copyright 2006 American Cancer Society

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.21851
PMID: 16586495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Oncol Rep. 2018 Mar 23;20(4):32. doi: 10.1007/s11912-018-0678-x.

Systemic Treatment Options for Advanced-Stage Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary 
Syndrome.

Photiou L(1), van der Weyden C(2), McCormack C(2), Miles Prince H(2).

Author information:
(1)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan Street, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, 
Australia. louise.photiou@gmail.com.
(2)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan Street, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, 
Australia.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a rare form of 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Globally, the most common subtypes of CTCL are mycosis 
fungoides and Sézary syndrome. CTCL can confer significant morbidity and even 
mortality in advanced disease. Here we review the current and potential future 
treatments for advanced-stage CTCL.
RECENT FINDINGS: Heterogeneity of treatment choice has been demonstrated both in 
US and non-US centers. Systemic treatment choice is currently guided by 
prognostic features, incorporating stage, immunophenotypic and molecular 
findings, and patient-specific factors such as age and comorbidities. Randomized 
controlled studies are uncommon, and the literature is composed predominantly of 
retrospective, cohort, and early-phase studies. International consensus 
guidelines are available; however, the lack of comparative trials means that 
there is no clear algorithmic approach to treatment. This review article reports 
on the systemic treatment options in current use for advanced CTCL, and on the 
possible future therapies, acknowledging that an algorithmic approach is not yet 
forthcoming to guide treatment prioritization.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-018-0678-x
PMID: 29572582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Jan;33 Suppl 1:S34-6. doi: 10.1016/s0959-8049(96)00327-9.

Interleukin-2 fusion protein: an investigational therapy for interleukin-2 
receptor expressing malignancies.

Nichols J(1), Foss F, Kuzel TM, LeMaistre CF, Platanias L, Ratain MJ, Rook A, 
Saleh M, Schwartz G.

Author information:
(1)Seragen Inc., Hopkinton, Massachusetts 01748, USA.

DAB389IL-2 is an interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) specific fusion protein with a 
molecular weight of 58 kD containing the enzymatic and translocation domains of 
diphtheria toxin (DT) and human IL-2. This fusion protein is able to direct the 
cytocidal action of the DT enzymatic region only to cells which bear the IL-2R. 
The human IL-2R exists in three forms: low, intermediate and high affinity. The 
high-affinity form is believed to be the biologically relevant form on mature, 
activated T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes and monocytes. DAB389IL-2 is able to bind 
selectively to the high-affinity IL-2R in a concentration-dependent manner, and 
once bound is internalised via receptor-mediated endocytosis. Upon acidification 
of the formed vesicle, the enzymatic portion of the fusion protein is believed 
to pass into the cytosol where it ultimately inhibits protein synthesis by 
inactivation of elongation factor-2, resulting in cell death. The constitutive 
expression of the IL-2R on certain leukaemic and lymphomatous cells of T and B 
cell origin has been reported to occur in patients with chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia, cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), Hodgkin's disease and non-Hodgkin's 
lymphomas (NHLs). A multicentre DAB389IL-2 dose-escalation study of patients 
with IL-2R expressing lymphomas has been conducted. A 10-fold range of doses 
were evaluated on a five-daily dose schedule. Patients received up to six 
courses, with an additional two courses permitted for patients with partial 
responses that appeared to be still improving after six courses. Most adverse 
experiences were transient and mild. Preliminary assessment of response 
indicated five complete responses (CR, duration ongoing at 20, 11, 7, 5 and 4 
months) and seven partial responses (PR, duration 3-20 months) in the 35 
patients with CTCL. One CR (duration > 20 months) in a patient with NHL 
(Lennett's lymphoma) and two PR (duration 9 and 2 months) in 17 patients with 
B-cell NHL have been observed. Based on the mode of action of DAB389IL-2, its 
safety profile, and the patient responses associated with the phase I/II 
clinical trials, a phase III programme in CTCL patients has been initiated and 
plans for additional trials in NHL patients are targeted for 1996.

DOI: 10.1016/s0959-8049(96)00327-9
PMID: 9166099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Sep;941:166-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb03720.x.

Interleukin-2 fusion toxin: targeted therapy for cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

Foss FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Tufts New England Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. 
ffoss@lifespan.org

The interleukin (IL)-2 receptor has proved an attractive target for T 
cell-directed therapies. Agents including monoclonal antibodies, single-chain 
antibody immunoconjugates, radioimmunoconjugates, and, most recently, ligand 
fusion toxins have demonstrated activity in vitro and in clinical trials in both 
hematologic malignancies and diseases characterized by proliferation of 
activated T cells, such as graft-versus-host disease. DAB389IL-2 (ONTAK) is a 
ligand fusion toxin consisting of the full-length sequence of the IL-2 gene 
genetically fused to the enzymatically active and translocating domains of 
diphtheria toxin. DAB389IL-2 and its predecessor, DAB486IL-2, have demonstrated 
activity in a variety of diseases, including cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), 
psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and HIV infection. Further clinical development 
of IL-2 fusion toxins in CTCL and other hematopoietic malignancies is predicated 
on identification of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor complex on the malignant 
cells and on a better understanding of the biological determinants of 
cytotoxicity of these molecules in vivo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb03720.x
PMID: 11594570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2000 Jan-Feb;1(1):67-72; discussion 73. doi: 
10.2165/00128071-200001010-00008.

Denileukin diftitox.

Figgitt DP(1), Lamb HM, Goa KL.

Author information:
(1)Adis International Limited, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Denileukin diftitox is a novel interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R)-targeted 
diphtheria toxin. It binds to cells expressing IL-2R and inhibits protein 
synthesis through internalization of the diphtheria toxin fragment. In patients 
with IL-2R-positive cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL), the overall response rate 
was 23 and 36%, respectively, after denileukin diftitox 9 or 18 
micrograms/kg/day for 5 days every 3 weeks and was 37% in a dose-ranging trial. 
Quality of life (QOL) improved significantly in patients with CTCL who responded 
to treatment with denileukin diftitox 9 or 18 micrograms/kg/day compared with 
QOL at baseline and in nonresponders. In a murine model of IL-2R-expressing 
malignancy, denileukin diftitox prolonged survival compared with controls. The 
most common adverse events reported in patients who received denileukin diftitox 
were hypoalbuminemia, fever/chills, acute hypersensitivity reactions, 
nausea/vomiting and asthenia. Vascular leak syndrome has occurred during 
denileukin diftitox therapy. Antibody titers to denileukin diftitox occur in 
most patients after treatment but the presence of antibodies does not preclude a 
clinical response.

DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200001010-00008
PMID: 11702307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunother. 2005 Nov-Dec;28(6):582-92. doi: 
10.1097/01.cji.0000175468.19742.10.

Inability of a fusion protein of IL-2 and diphtheria toxin (Denileukin Diftitox, 
DAB389IL-2, ONTAK) to eliminate regulatory T lymphocytes in patients with 
melanoma.

Attia P(1), Maker AV, Haworth LR, Rogers-Freezer L, Rosenberg SA.

Author information:
(1)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1201, USA.

Elimination of regulatory T lymphocytes may provide a way to break 
self-tolerance and unleash the anti-tumor properties of circulating lymphocytes. 
The use of fusion proteins, which link cytotoxic molecules to receptor targets, 
provides one approach to this problem. This study examined the ability of a 
fusion protein of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and diphtheria toxin (Denileukin 
Diftitox, DAB389IL-2, ONTAK) to eliminate regulatory T lymphocytes based on 
their expression of high-affinity IL-2 receptors. Thirteen patients (12 with 
metastatic melanoma, 1 with metastatic renal cell carcinoma) were treated at one 
of the two Food and Drug Administration-approved doses of Denileukin Diftitox 
(seven patients at 9 microg/kg, six patients at 18 microg/kg). None of the 
patients experienced an objective clinical response. Foxp3 expression did not 
decrease significantly overall, although it did decrease minimally among 
patients receiving 18 microg/kg (-2.01+/-0.618 copies of Foxp3/10(3) copies of 
beta-actin; P=0.031). Denileukin Diftitox did not decrease the suppressive 
ability of CD4CD25 cells as quantified by an in vitro co-culture suppression 
assay. Furthermore, the increased numbers of lymphocytes in patients resulting 
from treatment with IL-2 were not susceptible to Denileukin Diftitox. 
Administration of Denileukin Diftitox does not appear to eliminate regulatory T 
lymphocytes or cause regression of metastatic melanoma.

DOI: 10.1097/01.cji.0000175468.19742.10
PMCID: PMC1533764
PMID: 16224276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Front Med (Lausanne). 2019 May 29;6:116. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2019.00116. 
eCollection 2019.

Novel and Future Therapeutic Drugs for Advanced Mycosis Fungoides and Sézary 
Syndrome.

Oka T(1), Miyagaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SS) are the most common subtypes of 
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The majority of MF cases present with only patches 
and plaques and the lesions are usually limited to the skin. On the other hand, 
in some cases, patients show skin tumors or erythroderma followed by lymph node 
involvement and rarely visceral organ involvement. SS is a rare, aggressive 
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma marked by exfoliative erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, 
and leukemic blood involvement. Because patients with relapsed or refractory 
MF/SS display a poor prognosis and the current treatment options are 
characterized by high rates of relapse, there is unmet need for the efficient 
treatment. This review provides a discussion of the recent and future promising 
therapeutic approaches in the management of advanced MF/SS. These include 
mogamulizumab, brentuximab vedotin, alemtuzumab, immune checkpoint inhibitors, 
IPH4102 (anti-KIR3DL2 antibody), histone deacetylase inhibitors (vorinostat, 
romidepsin, panobinostat, belinostat, and resminostat), pralatrexate, 
forodesine, denileukin diftitox, duvelisib, lenalidomide, and everolimus.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2019.00116
PMCID: PMC6548851
PMID: 31192214